# Contrarian to Conventions

## History
### *The Beginning*
Hidetaka Miyazaki, the game’s director, is very private and does not like to appear in front of a camera. As of writing this, there are four videos of him: talking about the Chalice Dungeons in Bloodborne at PSX 2014, receiving the Lifetime Achievement Award at the 2018 Golden Joystick Awards, and receiving Game of the Year at both the 2019 and 2022 Game Awards; however, he has given several interviews discussing his career and design philosophy that I will be referencing. Miyazaki grew up “tremendously poor” and got a degree in social science at Keio University. He considered applying to a game development studio but got a job at Oracle Corporation. Years later, a college friend introduced him to Ico. Miyazaki states, “That game awoke me to the possibilities of the medium. I wanted to make one myself.” FromSoftware was one of the few studios who would hire him. He started as a programmer in 2004 and would become company president within 10 years. After working on the Armored Core series, Miyazaki was assigned to another game being developed – Demon’s Souls. Miyazaki says that “Demon’s Souls wasn’t doing well. The project had problems and the team had been unable to create a compelling prototype. But when I heard it was a fantasy-action role-playing game, I was excited. I figured if I could find a way to take control of the game, I could turn it into anything I wanted. Best of all, if my ideas failed, nobody would care – it was already a failure.” Miyazaki says that they “changed pretty much everything about it.”   
<br>
### *Soulslike*
There are two main mechanics that define a soulslike. The first is that upon the player's death, they will drop all of their currency (souls). The player will have to return to where they were killed and retrieve their lost souls. Dying again before retrieving their souls will result in losing all of their souls. The second is that reaching a checkpoint (bonfire) will restore their health, refill their means of healing and restoring focus, and reset all enemies apart from bosses. FromSoftware has modified this formula in nearly all of their soulslike games. For example, death in Bloodborne will result in the nearest enemy obtaining the player’s souls, requiring them to defeat the enemy to get them back. Death in Sekiro will result in the player instantly losing half of their currency; however, the player can also revive themselves if they have killed enough enemies or performed enough deathblows. Demon’s Souls and Bloodborne use consumable healing exclusively which is not restored upon resting at a checkpoint. FromSoftware’s games also greatly differ in mechanics not related to these two main soulslike mechanics. Soulslikes are also known for their difficulty and harsher punishment. Miyazaki states that “Overcoming challenges by learning something in a game is a very rewarding feeling, and that's what I wanted to prioritize in Dark Souls and Demon's Souls.” In order to “make death enjoyable [and] be more than a mark of failure,” he wants the player to experience hardship, as “hardship is what gives meaning to the experience,” and “players [will] experience the joy that comes from overcoming hardship.”

## Gameplay
### *Tutorial*
Demon’s Souls starts the player with a difficult decision right at the beginning – picking a starting class. There are five classes, each with different stats and gear. If this is the player’s first soulslike, they will likely not be knowledgeable enough to choose the best class for them. It is also not possible to respec your character. After choosing a class and customizing the character, the player is sent to the first area of the game. The whole area is small and linear. Glowing lines appear on the ground, which the player can interact with when standing directly on top of. These specific lines are messages created by the developers, teaching the player the controls; however, players can also leave their own messages for other players to see. The developers repurpose this mechanic to suit their own needs in teaching the player. The player will eventually fight their way through easier enemies until they reach their first boss encounter. This boss has slow, telegraphed attacks, just like the other bosses and enemies in the game. This allows players to anticipate and react to enemy attacks. This fight will be too much for new players of the genre, and a death will send the player to the hub world, ending the main tutorial. Defeating this boss will take the player to another area. In this new area, the player can collect some additional items and encounter a boss which is fought later in the game. This first encounter results in a scripted death for the player, sending them to the hub world and ending the main tutorial. It is common in FromSoftware games to have an unbeatable or nearly unbeatable enemy as the first boss encounter, exposing the player to insurmountable challenges and the tone of the game right from the start.  
<br>
### *Design / Gameplay Loop*
The hub world is called The Nexus, and it acts as a refuge for the player and various NPCs. NPCs that the player encounters throughout the game will also appear in The Nexus, providing additional dialogue and services. There are five Archstones which the player can interact with to load into other areas. All five locations are accessible to the player from the start of the game, making the game nonlinear and giving freedom to the player. There was also going to be a sixth location in a snowy environment, but it was removed due to time constraints. They made this sixth Archstone appear broken and is non-interactable. Bloodborne also uses a similar hub world, where the player can access already visited locations via Lamps through Headstones of Awakening (gravestones). Areas are large but are broken into sections. Bosses signify the end of the current level and the start of the next level. Levels in Demon’s Souls generally have a lot of verticality, multiple paths apart from some linear levels that add some diversity, and are filled with various types of enemies and items to collect. NPCs and vendors can also be found throughout levels, offering quest lines and additional dialogue. There are no checkpoints (archstones) throughout the levels; a new archstone will appear only after defeating a boss. The developers usually provide shortcuts from the previous archstone to the next boss fight, removing the need to make the long trek back towards the fight, and giving the player progression. Demon’s Souls uses consumable healing items (grass). Instead of healing for a percentage of the player’s health, grass heals for a specific amount. Because of this, as the player levels up and gains more health, it will take more and more grass to regain health. To make up for this, they added six different types of grass, each healing for different amounts of health points. This is a very messy system, as the player will have to juggle between six items that all do the same thing both during combat and out of combat. The consumable nature of healing also means that the player will likely run out of grass during boss fights or while trying to progress through the level, forcing players to stop what they are doing to farm for grass or farm for souls to purchase grass. The opposite can also happen where players have too much grass; this results in enemies posing little threat or emergency to players. This is a poor system on both sides of the coin, and it is fixed in Dark Souls with replenishable healing at checkpoints.  
<br>
### *Combat*
The top left of the screen displays three bars: a red bar represents the player’s health, a blue bar represents focus for magic, and a green bar represents stamina. The bottom left displays four slots of the player's currently equipped gear. The player can quickly swap between this gear with the d-pad. There are four means of attacking: melee, spellcasting, shooting arrows, and consumable projectiles. There are five means of avoiding or mitigating damage: dodge rolling, parrying, blocking with a shield, running, and armor. All of these means of offense and defense have an effect on the player’s stamina (except for spellcasting and consumable projectiles), which is the most important combat mechanic in the game, as everything revolves around the stamina system. The player must calculate their actions based on how much stamina they have or how much they will need. The player cannot constantly attack, as they must fall back to regain stamina and also heal. Attacking until out of stamina will make it more difficult to avoid an enemy’s attack. Blocking with a shield will reduce the incoming damage, but while the shield is up, the player's stamina will regain much slower so that the player cannot always have it up for protection. For attacking, there are many types of melee weapons, each with their pros and cons. It should also be noted that when a weapon collides with a wall, the attack animation will be cancelled. Other FromSoftware games have also adopted this mechanic. Spellcasters do not have to worry about losing stamina from attacking, but they will lose focus points (FP). Shooting arrows costs stamina and consumable arrows. Consumable projectiles will only cost what is thrown. For defense, dodge rolling is the most effective means of avoiding damage, as the player is granted a short period of invincibility during a certain amount of frames known as invincibility frames or iframes. The player's equipment burden (how much weight they are carrying) will also have an effect on their roll distance, number of iframes, and stamina regeneration. Parrying can be done during a tight window of an enemy's attack. Parrying will allow the player to riposte the enemy, dealing a significant amount of damage and obtaining iframes for the entire animation. Blocking with a shield will reduce the amount of incoming damage but greatly slow down stamina regeneration. Running gradually decreases stamina. Armor carries different stats for various types of damage, as well as different weights, resulting in a tradeoff between damage mitigation and movement. Most of the means of the player’s offense and defense are committed actions, meaning that once the player clicks a button, they cannot back out of that action and must wait until the animation is finished. As for bosses, a boss in Demon's Souls more closely resembles a boss in Zelda than a boss in FromSoftware’s later games. Bosses have a gimmick or puzzle that the player must understand in order to defeat them, whereas bosses in later games are more about perfect timing for dodging and attacking. A boss's health is also represented by a long red bar at the bottom of the screen. This health bar dwarfs the player’s, adding to the feeling of a challenge.  
<br>
## Death
### *Death and Punishment*
There are two states the player can be in: human form and soul form. In human form, player’s health is at maximum, they are open to being invaded by other players, they cannot be summoned to help other players, and death darkens the world tendency. In soul form, player’s maximum health is halved, they cannot be invaded, they can be summoned, and death does not darken the world tendency. Once in soul form, ways to return to human form include killing a boss in your own world or another player’s world, using a rare consumable item, or invading and defeating another player. Player’s will be in soul form for most of the game, and there is an item in the first area, the Cling Ring, which increases max health in soul form by 40-50%, so players will always have about ¾ of their health. This health system in Dark Souls II is similar, where max HP is reduced by a percentage per death up to a maximum of 50%. Death results in a hollowed state, and defeating a boss or using a consumable restores their humanity. Dark Souls III also gives the player a consumable (ember) after defeating a boss to increase their max HP until death. I previously mentioned world tendency; this is another mechanic that punishes death. Tendency is a morality or karma system. Defeating a boss will shift the world tendency towards white, and dying while in human form will shift it towards black. In white tendency enemies are weaker but give fewer souls and have a lower item drop rate, while black tendency is the opposite. Your world tendency will affect NPCs, questlines, optional areas, black phantom enemies, and primeval demons. There is also a character tendency, which depends on the actions towards NPCs and affects quest lines and special events.  
<br>
## Online
### *Asynchronous*
Demon’s Souls features an asynchronous and synchronous online system – the first of its kind. Firstly for asynchronous online, players can leave messages for other players to read, either to help or harm them. Pressing the select button will open up a menu where one can choose between the following six categories: warnings, advice, observations, location, musings, and terms. One can then choose a template and a word to fill in a blank if necessary. Messages appear on the ground and can be interacted with to view. Other players can rate messages as Fine or Foul, and all players can see the ratings, helping players to make an informed decision as to the reliability of messages. If your message gets rated, you’ll regain a small amount of HP. Secondly, when a player dies, they will leave a pool of blood at the location where they died. Other players can see these bloodstains, and when interacted with will show the player’s last moments before death, helping players to anticipate upcoming enemies. Thirdly, other players will appear in your world temporarily as white phantoms, showing you what other people are doing in their world.  
<br>
### *Synchronous*
There are three synchronous online modes: co-op, invasion PvP, and summon PvP. In co-op, you can place a blue sign on the floor for other players to interact with. Interaction will load you into their world where you must help the summoner to defeat the area’s boss. If the summoner (host) or summoned (client) dies, the summoned will be sent back to their world. In invasion PvP, you invade another player’s world with the goal of defeating the host. Defeating the host will grant the client awards and return them to their world. The client’s death will decrease their level by one and return them to their world. In summon PvP, you can place a red sign on the floor for other players to interact with. Interaction will load you into the host’s world where you battle each other for souls. There is also a unique boss called the Old Monk, which Miyazaki has said is his favorite from all of his games. In this fight, a player can be summoned into another player’s world as the boss, complete with new abilities and more health. If players are in offline mode or the player is not invaded, a normal AI boss will be fought. Miyazaki states that "from both the implementation and fun factor, we got a lot of pushback, and no one believed in it at the time. But in the end, we came through, and I think it turned into an intriguing boss that the fans appreciated. With Demon’s Souls, there were a lot of mechanics throughout the development that were difficult to design. For instance, the asynchronous online features were complicated, but I think the Old Monk encompasses those tribulations and how we pushed through and made something we were proud of." This concept is used again in the Halflight, Spear of the Church boss in Dark Souls III’s The Ringed City DLC.  
<br>
## Narrative
### *Environmental Storytelling*
Demon’s Souls and most FromSoftware games feature minimal plot and dialogue, perhaps inspired by the works of Fumito Ueda that inspired Miyazaki to enter the games industry. The narrative is told mainly through environmental storytelling, meaning that the environment and objects in the world are the main means of telling the story. Items in the game also have descriptions, revealing the wider and more in depth narrative. This method of worldbuilding allows events to be up to the interpretation of more casual players, while also offering more hardcore fans a more in depth world if they choose to dive deeper into it. This more hands off approach to storytelling also allows the gameplay to be the main focus.  
<br>
### *Saṃsāra*
Every FromSoftware game except for Sekiro features a similar overarching story. At the end, the player can choose between inheriting the responsibility of maintaining the current decaying world in a line of succession or allowing the world of suffering to end. I find this narrative to be somewhat similar to the Dharmic belief of Saṃsāra.  
<br>
## Impact
### *Grossly Incandescent*
Demon’s Souls sold few copies at its initial release and received somewhat negative reception in Japan, but after a few months it picked up more traction, sold 100,000 copies, and became successful in the West. Demon’s Souls went from cult status to being *the* PS5 launch title. FromSoftware and Miyazaki created a new and popular genre called soulslikes, with all of their games in this genre being highly regarded. Demon’s Souls and Dark Souls are considered to be some of the most influential and greatest games of all time, Bloodborne is considered to be one of the greatest games of all time, Sekiro and Elden Ring both won Game of the Year, and Elden Ring ranks in the top 10 games on OpenCritic.
